>>Tonight I want to tell you
three fantasies, all of which
have something in common.
The first fantasy is
about reproduction.
We use the word reproduction
in two principal ways--
when we talk about the
biological reproduction
of the species, and when
we talk about making
a good reproduction
of something,
in terms of a painting, a
photograph, or a recording,
or a video tape.
And what is all this about--
reproduction in that direction?
Hundreds of years
ago, kings of Europe
who wanted to form feudal
alliances by marrying
the princesses of
far-off states would
have painters send portraits
of the lady in question
to see if his majesty approved
of her before he got her.
And there's a famous story in
which Henry VIII of England
was badly cheated
in this respect
by a too-flattering
portrait of Ann of Cleves.
And therefore, there
grew up a kind of morale
among artists in the
European tradition
to make faithful
reproductions of people.
And they perfected
their technique,
beginning with the marvelous
work of the Renaissance
painters, and the
Flemish painters,
and going on finally
to what was called
Art Officiale in
the 19th century,
we got what we now call
photographic realism.
But then they said, isn't
there some more scientific way
of doing this?
And so they
discovered the camera.
And first of all, remember
those brownish daguerreotypes.
And people said,
well that is pretty.
It really looks like
grandpa, doesn't it?
And then they said, but
there's several things missing.
It isn't colored.
So first of all,
they tinted them.
And then they said well,
it's real lifelike.
But then they went on
to say but, you know,
there are some people whose
whole style of life, whose
personality, is in
the way they move.
And if you just take a
static shot like that,
the personality isn't there.
It's the way they go.
So we said we got to have some
way of making people move.
So they invented the movies.
And I remember when the
first movies came out.
They were all going dadadada.
Everybody was in a jerky way.
Then they smoothed it out.
And they said,
that's real lifelike.
But they said then, but
there's another thing
about reproducing people,
which is that they talk.
A whole lot of their
personality is in the voice.
So can't we have them talking
at the same time that they move?
So they invented the talkies.
And then to get it more lifelike
still, they colored them.
They said, wow, now we're
really getting somewhere.
Then to make it even more
real, they put it in 3D,
only you had to wear
sort of spectacles
over your face to
see it that way.
But then they went on to say,
why is it that every time we
want to see one of
these things, we
have to go down to
the center of town?
Can't we have it all at home?
And so television came on.
And in television,
they first of all
started out with
black and white,
and it was kind of, like
Robert Benchley once
described the cuts
in French newspapers
as all looking as if
they'd been made on bread.
Well, that was television
in a certain period.
And then they improved it.
And then they colored it.
And that's where we are now--
not quite, because somebody
has come out with the thing that
we shall all be seeing soon,
which is the hologram-- a
television image produced
by laser beams, where you see
a three-dimensional figure out
in the air in front of you.
Isn't that marvelous?
And then, but of course,
when you go up to it,
and you put your
hand on it, your hand
goes right through it.
You can't touch it.
And you see, that was always
the trouble with television,
because you look at whatever
you're seeing behind a screen.
It's intangible.
It doesn't smell, and
it won't relate to you.
So these are further
problems to be
solved in the techniques
of electronic reproduction.
And they'll do it.
They'll first of
all manage a way
in which the electronic emission
sources can solidify, and make
the air vibrate, so that you
go up and you touch the figure,
and you won't be able to
push your hand through it,
because the air will be
going faster than your hand.
Imagine that-- you can
actually, if there's
a beautiful dancer
on the television,
you'll be able to go
up and embrace her,
but she won't know you're there,
and she won't respond to you.
And you'll say, well that's
not very lifelike, just as they
once said, "If the
photograph doesn't move,
it's not very lifelike.
If it doesn't talk,
it's not very lifelike."
They'll next say, "If the
reproduction in three dimension
solid doesn't respond,
it's not very lifelike."
So they'll have to figure out
a technique for doing that.
What will they do?
I'll tell you.
Sitting in your
home, where you're
watching the scene on a kind
of stage now, not on a screen,
there'll be a TV
camera observing you.
And that TV camera
will report back
everything you do
into a computer.
And the computer will so manage
each bit of information--
that's to say, each tiny, little
granule unit of information
going into the image
that you're looking at,
that it will
immediately decide what
is the appropriate
response to the approach
that you are making
to the image.
Won't that be great?
She may slap you in the
face, and she may kiss you.
You never know.
But then, they'll say now, this
is still not really the kind
of reproduction we wanted.
What we wanted when
we looked at the scene
is to be able to identify
with one of the characters.
We wanted to not just
watch the drama that's
being performed on the
stage in front of us,
but actually get into it.
And so we want to be wired in
with electrodes on the brain,
so that we will actually
feel the emotions
of the people
acting on the stage.
And so eventually, we will
get absolutely perfect
reproduction.
And we will be able
to see that image
so vividly that we
shall become it.
And so the question
arises-- could that
be where we are already?
Are we a reproduction which
over the centuries of evolution
has worked out to be a
replica of something else that
was going on, and we are
where we always were?
Now the next fantasy
concerns the idea
that every living being
thinks it's human.
And that means a plant, a worm,
a virus, a bacterium, a fruit
fly, a hippopotamus,
a giraffe, a rabbit--
that all these beings,
wherever they feel out from,
as we feel out from
our bodies, feel
that they're in the middle.
That is to say
wherever you look,
you turn your head
around, and you
feel you are in the
middle of the world.
You feel you're the center.
And a rabbit or a fruit fly
feels that it is a center.
And it has around it a company
of associates who look like it.
And therefore,
this creature knows
that these are the
right people, just
as we know when we look
at human beings they
are the right people.
They are one of us.
Only of course, we have
to make distinctions,
because you never really
know that you are you,
and you are really in the right
place, unless you can contrast
yourself with some other
people who are, after all, not
quite in the right place,
and some other people who
are very much in
the wrong place.
And then through having this
succession of comparisons,
you know that you're OK.
Well, the insect has exactly
the same arrangement.
Well, you say, well,
insects and things
like fishes-- they
don't have any culture.
What do you mean, fishes being
civilized, and being entitled
to consider
themselves as humans?
Well let me put the argument
from the fish's point of view.
Fishes say human
beings are a mess.
Look what they do.
They can't exist without
cluttering themselves,
and carrying around all kinds
of things outside their bodies.
They have to have houses, and
automobiles, and books, books
and records, and television,
and hi-fi equipment, and stuff--
endless stuff.
And they litter the
earth with rubbish.
Think of a dolphin.
He isn't really a
fish because a dolphin
is a mammal-- but a
dolphin's point of view
towards the human race.
Dolphins spend most
of their time playing.
They don't work, because
the grocery is right there
in the ocean,
whatever they need.
And so a dolphin will catch
up with a seagoing liner,
and it'll get on the
wake of the liner,
and put its tail at an
exact angle of 26 degrees.
And in so doing, the liner
will carry the dolphin along.
The dolphin will make
circles around the liner
just for fun, playing all
its life in the water.
And we know that a
dolphin's brain is as big,
if not bigger than ours, that
it is incredibly intelligent,
that it has a language
which we can't decipher.
And the person who knows most
about dolphins in the United
States, Doctor John Lilly,
is a friend of mine.
And he said he came
to the conclusion
that dolphins were too smart
to tell us their language.
So he abandoned this project.
He said he would no longer keep
such a highly civilized being
in the concentration
camp of a zoo,
and that it should
go back to the ocean.
So the point is, though, that
every-- not only dolphins,
but every organism that
has any sensitivity in it
whatsoever considers itself to
be the center of the universe.
Now it has its problems.
There's a zen poem which
says, "The morning glory which
blooms for an hour differs not
at heart from a giant pine that
lives for 1,000 years."
In other words, an hour is a
long life to a morning glory.
1,000 years is a
long life to a pine.
And our four score years
and ten, or as the insurance
companies actuarial tables
put it, somewhere between 65
and 70 years is an
average human life,
seems about the
right length of life.
I mean, there are people
who want to go on and on,
and are in quest of immortality,
and have their bodies frozen
in case there should
develop in the future
some technique by which
they could be revived.
But I really don't
go for that idea,
because nature has
mercifully arranged
the principle of
forgettery as well
as the principle of memory.
If you always, and always, and
always remembered everything,
you see, you would it be
like a piece of paper which
had been painted over, and
painted over, and painted over,
until there was no
space left, and you
wouldn't be able to distinguish
between one thing and another.
It's like when a
whole bunch of people
start to scream, and make
noises, and out-scream
each other.
And soon you can hear nobody.
So in that way, one's
memories become screams.
And nature mercifully arranges
that the whole thing be erased,
and you begin again.
It doesn't matter in what form
you begin, whether you begin
again as a human
being, or as a fruit
fly, a butterfly, or
a beetle, or a bird.
It feels the same way
that you feel now.
So we're really all
in the same place.
And we all have above us things
much higher than ourselves.
And we all have below
us things that we
feel are much lower
than ourselves,
just as there are things
out there on the left,
and things out there on the
right, and things in front,
and things behind,
because you're the middle.
You're the middle
everywhere, always.
Now my third fantasy--
nobody has, it seems to me,
really seriously asked the
question, how do stars begin?
Why, how out of space do these
enormous radioactive centers
arise?
Well, I'm going to
solve this problem
on the principle of
the egg and the hen,
because it is said a
chicken is one egg's
way of becoming other eggs.
And if you've understood
my second fantasy,
you will see how
that could be true.
Now let's suppose
then that a planet
is one star's way of
becoming another star.
Stars, when they explode,
they send a lot of goo
out into space.
And some of this goo solidifies
into balls, which get in orbit,
and spin around the star.
And in one chance in 1,000,
maybe, one of those balls
will become like
the planet Earth.
And slowly upon it will
arise what some people might
call a disease, called the
bacteria of intelligent life.
And they have a notion, these
things that we call alive,
that they ought to go on.
They have a fixed
idea in their heads
that they should keep on doing
whatever it is they're doing,
and they should always
be doing it better.
So they divide themselves
into different species.
And these species
compete with each other,
in order to, as it were,
flex their muscles,
and get better and better
at whatever it is they are.
And they go on doing this until
one species really establishes
itself as top species
in the particular area
on the particular planet, as
we human beings, Homo sapiens,
have established
ourselves as top species
on Earth-- whatever top means.
Well then, when we
have a little leisure
and don't have to spend
all our time finding food
to put into our mouths,
we start asking questions.
And we look around at
each other and everything,
and say what is this?
I mean, what's going on here?
Well, some people say, that's
a stupid question to ask.
Why don't you just go
on doing your work?
Go hunting, go farming,
go doing your business.
They say, "No, there
are higher things."
So they create a special class
of people who are in India
called Brahmins, among us--
philosophers, scientists,
theologians, thinkers.
And they go into this question.
And they're allowed to stop
farming, to stop hunting,
to stop mining, to
stop scrubbing floors,
and to go to very special places
called universities, where they
can sit around and think
about what is going on.
Now they think about this.
First of all, they do
what they call philosophy,
which is they try to
say what it means.
What is the word be?
What does the word exist mean?
What do we mean when
we say we're here?
Well, they find they can't
discuss that very far,
because the word stops
meaning anything.
It sort of becomes a noise.
They say, now, we're not
really getting to the point.
What we've got to do is instead
of thinking all the time,
and just theorizing, and talking
words about what's going on,
we've got to investigate
it experimentally.
We've somehow got to
look into this stuff
that we call reality,
the material world,
and find out what it is.
So they start chopping it up.
They go into flowers, and
they chop up the seeds,
and they look into the
middle of the seeds.
They find something
there, and then
have to get a magnifying
glass and look in on that.
They get smaller, and
smaller, and smaller.
They reason they
must eventually come
to some particle called an atom.
In Greek, atom means
atomos, non-cuttable--
what you can't
split any further.
So they come down to the
atomos that than which
there is no whicher--
they thought.
But then they found they
could split that atom.
They could find the electron,
the positron, the meson,
et cetera, et cetera,
et cetera forever.
And so they said, well,
this is something.
This is real science,
because we've now found out
that every atomos of matter
contains immense energy,
and that we could
come to the point
where we could release
the energy in the atom.
And the trouble with
intellectual people
is that anything that
can be done must be done.
And so eventually, in
the necessary course
of the development
of nature, they
found out how to blow
the Earth to pieces
and turn it into a star.
So that may be, you see,
how stars originate.
They have planets, like
chickens have eggs.
And the eggs burst and
turn into chickens.
And planets burst, through the
agency of intelligent life,
and turn into stars, which
throw out other mud balls, some
of which stand a reasonable
chance-- about as
reasonable a chance, as
say, any male spermatozoan
stands when it enters the female
womb, of becoming a baby--
one in a million.
And those spermatozoa are
in exactly the same position
as the planets and the stars.
Now, I tell you,
this is a fantasy.
But you may ask me, isn't it
a rather unpleasant fantasy?
Aren't things going the wrong
way, the wrong direction?
In other words, if the
whole point of life,
I mean, this tender biological
substance with all its tubes
and filaments and nerves, which
are so very sensitive-- if all
this is to end up in fire, into
an absolute blaze of light,
don't we say, oh, what a shame.
Is that the way it ends?
But so many people say that
they want to see the light.
They want to be enlightened.
They want to dissolve
into the light of God.
And then when they've done
that, all over again the process
goes on, and it blows
out those mud balls.
And here are planets.
And here, once
again, you're a baby.
You're a child.
The flowers are
brilliantly colored.
The stars are gorgeous.
The smell of the Earth, the
sound of the rain, everything
is marvelous once again.
And once again, you see
the other-- the man,
the woman that you love.
As if it had never
happened before,
it all starts over again.
And as it goes on, it gets
more and more intense.
All the problems get more
and more problematic.
And you find you're
wrestling with something
you can't control.
You've got to control
it, but you absolutely
can't control it,
like all the problems
of the world at
the present time.
The whole scene is
completely out of hand,
and we feel we're
going to our doom,
because we are going once
again towards the birth
of a star, which is the most
creative thing there is.
Now, if you think
about this for a while,
I've put forward three
fantasies, all of which
have a cyclic quality.
We reproduce, not
only biologically,
but we reproduce
artistically, technically.
So just for a
moment, I want to put
in an aside about
biological reproduction.
When I think back to my
grandfather, whom I knew fairly
well, he was-- when
I was a little boy,
he was something
extraordinarily impressive.
He looked like King
Edward the seventh.
He was a very, very elegant
man, with a little goatee beard.
He didn't have sideburns like
this, and he had shorter hair,
but he was very elegant
fellow, dressed beautifully.
And I thought he was
the very image of God.
And now here I am, the same
age as he was when I first
knew him, and I have
five grandchildren.
And I'm no longer
impressed by grandfathers.
Here I am.
I'm one of them, too.
And this is the
same idea, you see,
of the round, that we are almost
perpetually in the same place.
As the French proverb says,
plus ca change, plus c'est
la meme chose-- the
more it changes,
the more it's the same thing.
Well, that means then,
you see, that existence,
the feeling of being,
is a sort of spectrum,
just as light is at one end red,
and at the other end violet.
And you have to
have these extremes
in order to have color at
all, in order to know light.
So you see likewise, we
have to have the experience
that there is somebody else,
something else going on
altogether out of
our control, in order
to have the experience
of being me.
And so in order to feel good,
to feel that life is worthwhile,
that existence is
worth going on with,
in order to bring out
that feeling, just
as the red brings
out the violet, there
has to be in the back of our
minds, maybe very far away,
the comprehension that there
is something that could happen,
that absolutely mustn't happen,
that is the horrors, that
is the screaming meemies
at the end of the line.
We have to know that's there.
And every so often,
that has to happen,
because if there isn't
the experience that we
go through called the screaming
meemies at the end of the line,
where everything has gone
wrong, like just before he died,
the British novelist
Arnold Bennett said,
"I feel somehow that
everything's absolutely wrong."
So the possibility,
even the imagination
that there could be
such an experience
in the back of our
heads is the background
which gives intensity
to the sense
that we call "feeling good,"
feeling that it's all right.
It's all right now.
I'm only bleeding.
So if you understand
that, you see that really
and truly, you're always
in the same place,
just as every creature
thinks it's a human being.
And as just every
being turns out
to be a reproduction by
some interesting technology,
whether it's electronic
or biological
makes very little difference.
And just as it may
be-- I don't know-
planets are stars' ways
of becoming other stars,
and so on, and so
on, but the moral is,
you're always in the same place.
And what is that place?
You can ask yourself
very, very-- I
won't say seriously, because
this isn't really serious, it's
sincere-- ask yourself very
sincerely if that is so,
if in other words, the
place in which you are now
is the place where
everything and everybody else
really is, only there's an
arrangement to pretend that you
ought to be somewhere else,
so the place where you are
is the place where
you're always pretending
you ought to be somewhere else.
And this is the nature of life.
This is the pulse.
I ought to be someone else.
So it's kind of a
gazung, like that, see?
When if you discover that
that's the trick that you're
playing on yourself,
you become serene.
And you don't entirely
give up the game,
because you've seen through it.
But you say it really might
be fun to go on playing.